writing.md, before:

# Getting Started

This site includes documentation of the tools,
components, and styles used on OddSite.
There are also [sample pages](/sample/) available
for viewing aspects of the site in context --
including [typography](/sample/type/),
[colors](/cascading-colors/), [responsive images](/sample/images/), and more.

## Writing Content

When creating content, it is important to stay consistent. Here are some
guidelines to help:

### Branding

- Always capitalize the “O”, “B”, and “S” in OddBird and OddSite.

### Commas

- Use the Oxford comma: "writing, design, and development"
  *Note the final comma before **and**.*

### Dashes

- En Dash `–` Used to show ranges of things (e.g. "January–March")
- Em Dash `—` Instead of using em-dashes for asides (as suggested by the The
  Chicago Manual of Style), using `<space><en-dash><space>` makes the block of
  text more readable (e.g. "this thing – and also that thing – etc").
  [Read more here](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/08/mind-your-en-and-em-dashes-typographic-etiquette/#the-en-dash-and-the-em-dash).
- Citations still need 2-3 dashes (`-`) to trigger the attribution class.

### Headlines

- Use Title Case: Capitalize the first letter of every word except articles,
  prepositions, and conjunctions.
- Do not use punctuation at the end of your title unless it contains
  more than one sentence, is a question, or would benefit from an interrobang
  (highly encouraged)‽

### Tags

- In general, blog posts should include the tag `Article`
- Reference the [tag list](/tags/) to avoid variations of a tag.
- Tags are Title Case: `User Experience`
- Tags with multiple words should have spaces instead of dashes unless the
  phrase is hyphenated (e.g. `Server-Side Rendering`).
- We have 5 Post Types which use the same tag structure but we have promoted on
  the Posts by Tag (high placement and icon in heading) and Posts by Date (icon
  displayed) pages. These include:
  - Article
  - Case Study
  - Link
  - Podcast
  - Video

*Case Study* posts include tags for their industry, for example `Technology Sector`

### Image Organization

Type of Content | Source Image Folder
----------------|--------------------
 OddBird Heros | `birds`
 Blog | `blog`
 Static Pages | `pages`
 Open Source | `projects`
 Testimonials | `quotes`
 Susy | `susy`
 Talks | `talks`
 Work | `work/projectname`
 Books | `writing`


There are a few additional image folders for specific use cases.

Commit message:

update image content to include winging it

writing.md, after:

# Getting Started

This site includes documentation of the tools,
components, and styles used on OddSite.
There are also [sample pages](/sample/) available
for viewing aspects of the site in context --
including [typography](/sample/type/),
[colors](/cascading-colors/), [responsive images](/sample/images/), and more.

## Writing Content

When creating content, it is important to stay consistent. Here are some
guidelines to help:

### Branding

- Always capitalize the “O”, “B”, and “S” in OddBird and OddSite.

### Commas

- Use the Oxford comma: "writing, design, and development"
  *Note the final comma before **and**.*

### Dashes

- En Dash `–` Used to show ranges of things (e.g. "January–March")
- Em Dash `—` Instead of using em-dashes for asides (as suggested by the The
  Chicago Manual of Style), using `<space><en-dash><space>` makes the block of
  text more readable (e.g. "this thing – and also that thing – etc").
  [Read more here](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/08/mind-your-en-and-em-dashes-typographic-etiquette/#the-en-dash-and-the-em-dash).
- Citations still need 2-3 dashes (`-`) to trigger the attribution class.

### Headlines

- Use Title Case: Capitalize the first letter of every word except articles,
  prepositions, and conjunctions.
- Do not use punctuation at the end of your title unless it contains
  more than one sentence, is a question, or would benefit from an interrobang
  (highly encouraged)‽

### Tags

- In general, blog posts should include the tag `Article`
- Reference the [tag list](/tags/) to avoid variations of a tag.
- Tags are Title Case: `User Experience`
- Tags with multiple words should have spaces instead of dashes unless the
  phrase is hyphenated (e.g. `Server-Side Rendering`).
- We have several Post Types which use the same tag structure but we have
  promoted on the Posts by Tag (high placement and icon in heading) and Posts
  by Date (icon displayed) pages. These include:
  - Article
  - Case Study
  - Link
  - Podcast
  - Video
  - Winging It

*Case Study* posts include tags for their industry, for example `Technology Sector`

### Image Organization

Type of Content | Source Image Folder
----------------|--------------------
 OddBird Heros | `birds`
 Blog | `blog`
 Static Pages | `pages`
 Open Source | `projects`
 Testimonials | `quotes`
 Susy | `susy`
 Talks | `talks`
 Work | `work/projectname`
 Books | `writing`
 Winging It | `winging-it`


There are a few additional image folders for specific use cases.
