content/blog/2025/anchor-position-validity.md, before:

---
title: Here's Why Your Anchor Positioning Isn't Working
sub: How to find an anchor element
date: 2025-01-29
image:
  src: blog/2025/anchor-valid.jpg
  alt: >
    A weathered small boat in the fog, with ropes going into the water,
    hopefully leading to an anchor.
author: james
sponsors: true
tags:
  - Article
  - Anchor Positioning
  - CSS
summary: |
  It is frustrating to track down why an anchor isn't being found.
  I've found a simple way that should work in most cases.
  If that doesn't work, step through the checklist,
  and then dive in to get a better understanding
  of how Anchor Positioning works.
---

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

{% callout 'note', false %}
**TL;DR** -- For the best chance of having anchor positioning work, here's my
recommendation:

1. Make the anchor and the positioned element siblings.
2. Put the anchor first in the DOM.

Go give that a try, and then come back and find out what to check next if that
didn't work.

I'll wait.
{% endcallout %}

## The problem

Anchor positioning has a [ton of
possibilities](/2024/11/18/anchor-position-yearbook/), and is fun to play around
with. But sometimes things start to break. The positioned element can't find the
anchor, it isn't positioned correctly, and Dev Tools just says `--anchor is not
defined`.

Then you need to figure out why... Is it related to how you've structured your
markup, a browser bug or partial implementation, or maybe it's how you're using
Shadow DOM?

There are many reasons why it can fail, but they all fail in the same way. This
makes it really hard to troubleshoot and recover from.

## Troubleshooting checklist

Here's how to check for some of the common reasons why an anchor isn't found:

1. [Check that your anchor is not a parent of the positioned element.](#anchor-as-a-parent-to-the-positioned-element) If it is,
   make sure the anchor is not generating a containing block for the anchor.
1. [Check that the anchor is an element or valid pseudo-element.](#valid-anchor-pseudo-elements)
1. [Check that both the anchor and positioned elements are in the same `anchor-scope`
   subtree.](#anchor-scope)
1. [If your anchor is absolutely positioned, make sure it comes before the positioned
   element in the DOM.](#absolute-anchor-order)
1. [Check that your anchor is not in a higher top layer (generated by a popover or modal dialog)
   than the positioned element.](#top-layer)
1. [Check that the `anchor-name` is defined by styles in the same shadow or document tree
   where it is referred to.](#anchoring-across-shadow-trees)

If your issue isn't on this list, [let us know](/contact/) how you fixed it!
This list isn't exhaustive, and omits some cases with hidden content, fixed
position anchors, and other less likely edge cases.

We're also [available for office hours](/contact/) to help work through your
specific case.

{% callout 'note', false %}

The examples in this article are best viewed in a Chromium browser, version 131
or later. In the examples that show that an anchor is not found, be aware of a
[bug](https://issues.chromium.org/issues/388575663) in Chromium that causes
elements with a `position-area` rule that do not have a valid anchor to be
positioned incorrectly. 🤷🏼‍♂️

{% endcallout %}

<h3 id="anchor-as-a-parent-to-the-positioned-element">Anchor as a parent to the positioned element</h3>

While a positioned element can be a child of the anchor, this is the primary
place where I've seen anchor positioning fail.

The [spec](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-anchor-position/) has specific
requirements regarding the relationship between the containing blocks of the
anchor and the positioned element -- and containing blocks are essentially
invisible, except in their effects, to developers. This leads to unexpected and
surprising behavior.

{% callout 'note', false %}
While containing blocks deserve an entire deep dive post, in the meantime
there's a [brief note](#containing-blocks) at the end of this article.
{% endcallout %}

The containing block for the positioned element cannot be a descendant of the
containing block for the anchor. Put a different way, the space in which the
positioned element can be positioned cannot be smaller than the space in which
the anchor can be positioned. (Note: this is technically less accurate, but it
helps me visualize the rule.)

{% callout 'note', false %}
Add this to your mental model:

*The space in which the positioned element can be positioned cannot be smaller
than the space in which the anchor can be positioned.*
{% endcallout %}

<!-- TODO: Is there a visual way of showing this? -->

Crucially, if the anchor element is a parent to the positioned element and
creates a containing box for the positioned element, anchor positioning will not
work. The positioned element's containing box will be the anchor, and the
anchor's containing box will be one of its ancestors.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='raBdLWP',
  title='Absolute anchor order',
  user='jamessw',
  height=300,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

There are many things that can cause the anchor element to create a containing
block, and positioned elements that are children will not work:

- If you set a `position` besides `static` on the anchor and the positioned
  element is `position: absolute`
- If you transform the anchor element somehow, with `transform`, `translate`,
  `scale`, etc.
- If the anchor element is a query container for container size queries

This is not an exhaustive list. Because there are so many ways to get into this
situation unexpectedly, I recommend not nesting positioned elements inside the
anchor.

<h3 id="valid-anchor-pseudo-elements">Valid anchor pseudo-elements</h3>

Most anchors will be elements, but if you're using a pseudo-element, not all
qualify. The pseudo-element must be a "fully styleable tree-abiding
pseudo-element." Tree-abiding pseudo-elements behave like regular elements,
unlike pseudo-elements like `::first-letter` or `::spelling-error`. Some, like
`::marker` or `::placeholder`, are not fully styleable, as they only allow some
CSS properties.

The valid pseudo-elements are `::before`, `::after` and
`::file-selector-button`. `::-webkit-slider-thumb` currently works as an anchor
in Chrome, but as it is experimental and not part of any CSS spec, it's unclear
whether it should.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='GgKxNWV',
  title='Valid anchor pseudo-elements',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200
) }}

<h3 id="anchor-scope">Anchor scope</h3>

Anchor scope is great for making reusable anchoring rules, especially if you are
anchoring on a list item or reusing styles. If you're using `anchor-scope`,
verify that both the anchor and positioned element are descendants of the
element with the `anchor-scope` rule, or if the anchor itself has the
`anchor-scope` rule, that the positioned element is a descendant of the anchor.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='QwLVGjZ',
  title='Anchor Scope',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

<h3 id="absolute-anchor-order">Absolute anchor order</h3>

This is the motivation behind the recommended solution to have the anchor come
before the positioned element in the DOM.

Generally, absolutely positioned elements are rendered after relatively
positioned elements. If the anchor element is absolutely positioned, then the
positioned element must come after the anchor in the DOM.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='xbKpedP',
  title='Absolute anchor order',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

{% callout 'note', false %}
The "after the anchor in the DOM" check happens on the `flat tree`, which means
that it happens after slotted content is placed and shadow hosts are filled with
their children.
{% endcallout %}

<h3 id="top-layer">Top layer</h3>

If you are using dialogs as modals or popovers, you are creating top layers. If
the anchor element is in a [higher top
layer](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-position-4/#top-layer) than the positioned
element, the positioned element will not be able to locate the anchor.

You can position the root popover or dialog directly using `position: absolute`.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='OPLzjJq',
  title='Top Layer',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

However, if you want to position an element that is inside the popover or
dialog, you will need to use `position: fixed`. Note that the positioned
elements are not inside their parents in this example -- `position: fixed` moves
the element's containing block to the viewport and allows positioning to work.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='vEBbVXq',
  title='Top Layer - inside',
  user='jamessw',
  height=250,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

<h3 id="anchoring-across-shadow-trees">Anchoring across shadow trees</h3>

An element in one tree can anchor to an element in another tree, as long as the
relevant styles are all defined in the same style tree. In other words, if
`anchor-name` is defined in a shadow tree, the `position-anchor` or `anchor()`
styles must also be defined in that shadow tree. If the `anchor-name` is defined
outside a shadow tree using `::part()`, then the `position-anchor` or `anchor()`
styles can be defined outside as well.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='zxOWoOE',
  title='Anchor on Shadow Part',
  user='jamessw',
  height=250
) }}

## Containing blocks

> Notably, a containing block is not a box (it is a
> rectangle)...
>
> ---[CSS Display Module Level 4
> spec](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-display-4/#containing-block)

Great, I totally understand...

You likely have run into containing blocks before. When you are positioning
something with absolute positioning, it is positioned relative to its containing
block.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='NPKyRPm',
  title='Containing box for absolutely positioned element',
  user='jamessw',
  height=300
) }}

If you use percentages to define widths and heights, these are calculated
relative to the element's containing block.

To figure out an element's containing block, find the ancestor element that the
element's position and size are relative to. This is dependent on the element's
`position` value, so for example, if the element is fixed position, the
containing block can be the viewport, or if the element is relative position,
the containing block could be generated by an ancestor `<li>` element.

I've found MDN's guide on [Identifying the containing
block](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block#identifying_the_containing_block)
a helpful resource to unravel the containing block.

## Ways to make this easier

Troubleshooting why an anchor is not found is not fun or easy. Anchor
Positioning is in its early days, but as adoption grows, I hope we can find ways
to make this easier.

An important part will be to improve dev tooling when an anchor is not found.
Perhaps next to a `--anchor is not found` message, there could be a crosshair
selector to select the DOM element you thought would be the anchor. Then the Dev
Tools could provide a specific message of why that particular combination would
not work.

Another useful improvement would be a method to identify an element's containing
block. Perhaps there could be a new `:containing-block` pseudo-class that
selects the element that creates the containing block, or a
`HTMLElement.containingBlock` attribute. Because this is primarily useful while
developing, it may be better to instead add a way of finding this in Dev Tools,
instead of through browser APIs.

I think we also need to find better mental models to understand render order and
containing blocks. Is there a way we could move this from a set of guidelines
and a checklist of gotchas to avoid, to a place where these rules click and make
sense to developers?

## Sponsor us

If you found this article helpful, please [sponsor our
work](https://opencollective.com/oddbird-open-source)! Deep dives like this take
time and energy, and we want to keep them coming!

You can also [hire us](/contact/) to develop the [Anchor Positioning
polyfill](https://anchor-positioning.oddbird.net/) or another OSS language/tool
you rely on. Our client work also helps fund our educational work like this
article, so get in touch with us if you have any web development needs.

Commit message:

Link to CSS WG issue

content/blog/2025/anchor-position-validity.md, after:

---
title: Here's Why Your Anchor Positioning Isn't Working
sub: How to find an anchor element
date: 2025-01-29
image:
  src: blog/2025/anchor-valid.jpg
  alt: >
    A weathered small boat in the fog, with ropes going into the water,
    hopefully leading to an anchor.
author: james
sponsors: true
tags:
  - Article
  - Anchor Positioning
  - CSS
summary: |
  It is frustrating to track down why an anchor isn't being found.
  I've found a simple way that should work in most cases.
  If that doesn't work, step through the checklist,
  and then dive in to get a better understanding
  of how Anchor Positioning works.
---

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

{% callout 'note', false %}
**TL;DR** -- For the best chance of having anchor positioning work, here's my
recommendation:

1. Make the anchor and the positioned element siblings.
2. Put the anchor first in the DOM.

Go give that a try, and then come back and find out what to check next if that
didn't work.

I'll wait.
{% endcallout %}

## The problem

Anchor positioning has a [ton of
possibilities](/2024/11/18/anchor-position-yearbook/), and is fun to play around
with. But sometimes things start to break. The positioned element can't find the
anchor, it isn't positioned correctly, and Dev Tools just says `--anchor is not
defined`.

Then you need to figure out why... Is it related to how you've structured your
markup, a browser bug or partial implementation, or maybe it's how you're using
Shadow DOM?

There are many reasons why it can fail, but they all fail in the same way. This
makes it really hard to troubleshoot and recover from.

## Troubleshooting checklist

Here's how to check for some of the common reasons why an anchor isn't found:

1. [Check that your anchor is not a parent of the positioned element.](#anchor-as-a-parent-to-the-positioned-element) If it is,
   make sure the anchor is not generating a containing block for the anchor.
1. [Check that the anchor is an element or valid pseudo-element.](#valid-anchor-pseudo-elements)
1. [Check that both the anchor and positioned elements are in the same `anchor-scope`
   subtree.](#anchor-scope)
1. [If your anchor is absolutely positioned, make sure it comes before the positioned
   element in the DOM.](#absolute-anchor-order)
1. [Check that your anchor is not in a higher top layer (generated by a popover or modal dialog)
   than the positioned element.](#top-layer)
1. [Check that the `anchor-name` is defined by styles in the same shadow or document tree
   where it is referred to.](#anchoring-across-shadow-trees)

If your issue isn't on this list, [let us know](/contact/) how you fixed it!
This list isn't exhaustive, and omits some cases with hidden content, fixed
position anchors, and other less likely edge cases.

We're also [available for office hours](/contact/) to help work through your
specific case.

{% callout 'note', false %}

The examples in this article are best viewed in a Chromium browser, version 131
or later. In the examples that show that an anchor is not found, be aware of a
[bug](https://issues.chromium.org/issues/388575663) in Chromium that causes
elements with a `position-area` rule that do not have a valid anchor to be
positioned incorrectly. 🤷🏼‍♂️

{% endcallout %}

<h3 id="anchor-as-a-parent-to-the-positioned-element">Anchor as a parent to the positioned element</h3>

While a positioned element can be a child of the anchor, this is the primary
place where I've seen anchor positioning fail.

{% callout 'note', false %} This may be changing- in our Winging It episode with
Tab Atkins-Bittner, Tab identified that this restriction may not be necessary.
[This issue](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/11769) proposes a change
to the spec to allow this. {% endcallout %}

The [spec](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-anchor-position/) has specific
requirements regarding the relationship between the containing blocks of the
anchor and the positioned element -- and containing blocks are essentially
invisible, except in their effects, to developers. This leads to unexpected and
surprising behavior.

{% callout 'note', false %}
While containing blocks deserve an entire deep dive post, in the meantime
there's a [brief note](#containing-blocks) at the end of this article.
{% endcallout %}

The containing block for the positioned element cannot be a descendant of the
containing block for the anchor. Put a different way, the space in which the
positioned element can be positioned cannot be smaller than the space in which
the anchor can be positioned. (Note: this is technically less accurate, but it
helps me visualize the rule.)

{% callout 'note', false %}
Add this to your mental model:

*The space in which the positioned element can be positioned cannot be smaller
than the space in which the anchor can be positioned.*
{% endcallout %}

<!-- TODO: Is there a visual way of showing this? -->

Crucially, if the anchor element is a parent to the positioned element and
creates a containing box for the positioned element, anchor positioning will not
work. The positioned element's containing box will be the anchor, and the
anchor's containing box will be one of its ancestors.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='raBdLWP',
  title='Absolute anchor order',
  user='jamessw',
  height=300,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

There are many things that can cause the anchor element to create a containing
block, and positioned elements that are children will not work:

- If you set a `position` besides `static` on the anchor and the positioned
  element is `position: absolute`
- If you transform the anchor element somehow, with `transform`, `translate`,
  `scale`, etc.
- If the anchor element is a query container for container size queries

This is not an exhaustive list. Because there are so many ways to get into this
situation unexpectedly, I recommend not nesting positioned elements inside the
anchor.

<h3 id="valid-anchor-pseudo-elements">Valid anchor pseudo-elements</h3>

Most anchors will be elements, but if you're using a pseudo-element, not all
qualify. The pseudo-element must be a "fully styleable tree-abiding
pseudo-element." Tree-abiding pseudo-elements behave like regular elements,
unlike pseudo-elements like `::first-letter` or `::spelling-error`. Some, like
`::marker` or `::placeholder`, are not fully styleable, as they only allow some
CSS properties.

The valid pseudo-elements are `::before`, `::after` and
`::file-selector-button`. `::-webkit-slider-thumb` currently works as an anchor
in Chrome, but as it is experimental and not part of any CSS spec, it's unclear
whether it should.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='GgKxNWV',
  title='Valid anchor pseudo-elements',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200
) }}

<h3 id="anchor-scope">Anchor scope</h3>

Anchor scope is great for making reusable anchoring rules, especially if you are
anchoring on a list item or reusing styles. If you're using `anchor-scope`,
verify that both the anchor and positioned element are descendants of the
element with the `anchor-scope` rule, or if the anchor itself has the
`anchor-scope` rule, that the positioned element is a descendant of the anchor.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='QwLVGjZ',
  title='Anchor Scope',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

<h3 id="absolute-anchor-order">Absolute anchor order</h3>

This is the motivation behind the recommended solution to have the anchor come
before the positioned element in the DOM.

Generally, absolutely positioned elements are rendered after relatively
positioned elements. If the anchor element is absolutely positioned, then the
positioned element must come after the anchor in the DOM.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='xbKpedP',
  title='Absolute anchor order',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

{% callout 'note', false %}
The "after the anchor in the DOM" check happens on the `flat tree`, which means
that it happens after slotted content is placed and shadow hosts are filled with
their children.
{% endcallout %}

<h3 id="top-layer">Top layer</h3>

If you are using dialogs as modals or popovers, you are creating top layers. If
the anchor element is in a [higher top
layer](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-position-4/#top-layer) than the positioned
element, the positioned element will not be able to locate the anchor.

You can position the root popover or dialog directly using `position: absolute`.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='OPLzjJq',
  title='Top Layer',
  user='jamessw',
  height=200,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

However, if you want to position an element that is inside the popover or
dialog, you will need to use `position: fixed`. Note that the positioned
elements are not inside their parents in this example -- `position: fixed` moves
the element's containing block to the viewport and allows positioning to work.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='vEBbVXq',
  title='Top Layer - inside',
  user='jamessw',
  height=250,
  tab='html,result'
) }}

<h3 id="anchoring-across-shadow-trees">Anchoring across shadow trees</h3>

An element in one tree can anchor to an element in another tree, as long as the
relevant styles are all defined in the same style tree. In other words, if
`anchor-name` is defined in a shadow tree, the `position-anchor` or `anchor()`
styles must also be defined in that shadow tree. If the `anchor-name` is defined
outside a shadow tree using `::part()`, then the `position-anchor` or `anchor()`
styles can be defined outside as well.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='zxOWoOE',
  title='Anchor on Shadow Part',
  user='jamessw',
  height=250
) }}

## Containing blocks

> Notably, a containing block is not a box (it is a
> rectangle)...
>
> ---[CSS Display Module Level 4
> spec](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-display-4/#containing-block)

Great, I totally understand...

You likely have run into containing blocks before. When you are positioning
something with absolute positioning, it is positioned relative to its containing
block.

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='NPKyRPm',
  title='Containing box for absolutely positioned element',
  user='jamessw',
  height=300
) }}

If you use percentages to define widths and heights, these are calculated
relative to the element's containing block.

To figure out an element's containing block, find the ancestor element that the
element's position and size are relative to. This is dependent on the element's
`position` value, so for example, if the element is fixed position, the
containing block can be the viewport, or if the element is relative position,
the containing block could be generated by an ancestor `<li>` element.

I've found MDN's guide on [Identifying the containing
block](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block#identifying_the_containing_block)
a helpful resource to unravel the containing block.

## Ways to make this easier

Troubleshooting why an anchor is not found is not fun or easy. Anchor
Positioning is in its early days, but as adoption grows, I hope we can find ways
to make this easier.

An important part will be to improve dev tooling when an anchor is not found.
Perhaps next to a `--anchor is not found` message, there could be a crosshair
selector to select the DOM element you thought would be the anchor. Then the Dev
Tools could provide a specific message of why that particular combination would
not work.

Another useful improvement would be a method to identify an element's containing
block. Perhaps there could be a new `:containing-block` pseudo-class that
selects the element that creates the containing block, or a
`HTMLElement.containingBlock` attribute. Because this is primarily useful while
developing, it may be better to instead add a way of finding this in Dev Tools,
instead of through browser APIs.

I think we also need to find better mental models to understand render order and
containing blocks. Is there a way we could move this from a set of guidelines
and a checklist of gotchas to avoid, to a place where these rules click and make
sense to developers?

## Sponsor us

If you found this article helpful, please [sponsor our
work](https://opencollective.com/oddbird-open-source)! Deep dives like this take
time and energy, and we want to keep them coming!

You can also [hire us](/contact/) to develop the [Anchor Positioning
polyfill](https://anchor-positioning.oddbird.net/) or another OSS language/tool
you rely on. Our client work also helps fund our educational work like this
article, so get in touch with us if you have any web development needs.
