content/blog/2025/box-model.md, before:

---
title: Don't Inherit the Box Model
sub: It's time to stop spreading this out-dated practice
author: miriam
date: 2025-09-04
image:
  src: blog/2025/box-model.png
  alt: >
    diagram of the box model,
    content inside,
    then padding, border, and margins.
tags:
  - Article
  - CSS
  - Layout
related_tag: CSS
summary: |
  Setting the box-model to `border-box`
  is one of the few remaining
  CSS 'resets' used across most projects.
  But there are two common approaches,
  and the more popular choice
  will cause more problems than it solves.
---

{% import "embed.macros.njk" as embed %}

At the most basic,
a modern CSS 'reset'
will often start with one of the following:

```css
/* set it everywhere (good!) */
* { box-sizing: border-box; }

/* set on root, then inherit (bad!) */
html { box-sizing: border-box; }
* { box-sizing: inherit; }
```

Each one has a variant
that includes `*::before, *::after`
along side the universal selector.
That's because `*` itself only selects actual elements,
not pseudo-elements like `::before` and `::after`.
We'll get to that,
but first let's talk about
inheriting the box model.

## Box properties should not inherit

While inheritance is a core concept in CSS,
only a small minority of properties ever do it.
Inheritance is part of the 'defaulting' process,
which determines what to do
when no value has been explicitly provided
for a given property on a given element.
Some properties,
like `color` and `font` revert to
the value used on the parent element.
They _inherit_ the value.
But most of the properties we use --
`background`, `border`, `margin`, `padding`, `display`,
and so on --
revert instead to their _initial_ value
defined in the specification.

There are more properties in each category,
but I think at this point
the distinction should be clear.
Some properties apply to _the contents_,
and those are the properties that inherit.
Other properties apply to _the box_,
and do not inherit.

Generally your instinct will tell you which is which.
If you add a random `span` somewhere in a line of text,
which properties would _need to inherit_
in order for that `span` to remain un-styled by default?
If the `font-size` or `color` of the text
reset to their initial values (`medium` and `CanvasText`),
that would be a noticeable change in styles.
But if a `border` and `background` were added
to match the parent box,
that would be even more noticeable!

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='eYXbPJP',
  title='Inheritance intuition',
  user='miriamsuzanne',
  height=600
) }}

## There's no good argument for inheritance

Of course,
we could still argue
that `box-model` is an outlier,
and should be one of the exceptions.
The argument I've seen
comes from way back when `box-model`
was first introduced --
and it was very specific to the transitional period
before `box-model` was widely used.

The claim is that
we might still have some legacy components
or third-party widgets on our site
that still rely on a _content-box_ model.
By setting `box-model` to `inherit`,
we can change our box-model on the widget container,
and it will apply to everything inside.
The assumption is that any component
will be designed using one box model or the other --
so we want to quickly toggle between them
for entire sub-sections of a web page.

And for a time,
that might have been a fair assumption.
But you can handle that case easily
without relying on inheritance:

```css
/* set it everywhere */
* { box-model: border-box; }

/* override it in context */
.content-box-sizing, .content-box-sizing * {
  box-model: content-box;
}
```

This isn't more difficult than inheritance,
and it's less code by default.
But more important to me,
_that's not the best use of `box-sizing`_.

## Box-model is more useful when it doesn't inherit!

Contrary to popular belief,
there's not a _modern_ `border-box` model,
and a _legacy_ `content-box` --
where sites/components can easily divide
between the two.
While the `border-box` model
is clearly a more useful _default_
in modern web design,
there are great reasons to use
`content-box` sizing
in modern layouts!

This may seem to obvious,
but the `content-box` model is useful
_when we care about the size of the content_.
I find that most useful for wrapping containers.
When I'm setting a good line-length for text content,
I don't actually care about the outer max-width of the `border-box`,
I care about the line-length available in the `content-box`.
Borders and padding should be additional,
rather than eating into the content.

I find this is often true with generated
`::before` and `::after` content as well --
which is why I don't generally change the default
on pseudo-elements.
I can handle it case-by-case, when needed.

The code-smell for switching box models
is any time we need a sizing calculation
that adds or removes the borders and padding:

```css
/* use content-box instead! */
.container {
  padding: var(--padding);
  width: calc(var(--line-length) + (var(--padding) * 2));
}

/* much better */
.container {
  box-sizing: content-box;
  padding: var(--padding);
  width: var(--line-length);
}
```

When we're using `box-model` in this way --
_the way it was intended!_ --
inheritance would only get in the way.
I specifically want the ability to size containers
_differently_ from the rest of the elements
inside the container.

This may not happen all the time
in your code,
but I'm confident the
legacy-component use-case is _even less common_ --
and even simpler to handle on a case-by-case basis.

Please don't inherit the box model.
It starts you off in the wrong mindset,
just to solve a problem that doesn't really exist.

Commit message:

Fix box-model/box-sizing typos

content/blog/2025/box-model.md, after:

---
title: Don't Inherit the Box Model
sub: It's time to stop spreading this out-dated practice
author: miriam
date: 2025-09-04
image:
  src: blog/2025/box-model.png
  alt: >
    diagram of the box model,
    content inside,
    then padding, border, and margins.
tags:
  - Article
  - CSS
  - Layout
related_tag: CSS
summary: |
  Setting the `box-sizing` model to `border-box`
  is one of the few remaining
  CSS 'resets' used across most projects.
  But there are two common approaches,
  and the more popular choice
  will cause more problems than it solves.
---

{% import "embed.macros.njk" as embed %}

At the most basic,
a modern CSS 'reset'
will often start with one of the following:

```css
/* set it everywhere (good!) */
* { box-sizing: border-box; }

/* set on root, then inherit (bad!) */
html { box-sizing: border-box; }
* { box-sizing: inherit; }
```

Each one has a variant
that includes `*::before, *::after`
along side the universal selector.
That's because `*` itself only selects actual elements,
not pseudo-elements like `::before` and `::after`.
We'll get to that,
but first let's talk about
inheriting the box model.

## Box properties should not inherit

While inheritance is a core concept in CSS,
only a small minority of properties ever do it.
Inheritance is part of the 'defaulting' process,
which determines what to do
when no value has been explicitly provided
for a given property on a given element.
Some properties,
like `color` and `font` revert to
the value used on the parent element.
They _inherit_ the value.
But most of the properties we use --
`background`, `border`, `margin`, `padding`, `display`,
and so on --
revert instead to their _initial_ value
defined in the specification.

There are more properties in each category,
but I think at this point
the distinction should be clear.
Some properties apply to _the contents_,
and those are the properties that inherit.
Other properties apply to _the box_,
and do not inherit.

Generally your instinct will tell you which is which.
If you add a random `span` somewhere in a line of text,
which properties would _need to inherit_
in order for that `span` to remain un-styled by default?
If the `font-size` or `color` of the text
reset to their initial values (`medium` and `CanvasText`),
that would be a noticeable change in styles.
But if a `border` and `background` were added
to match the parent box,
that would be even more noticeable!

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='eYXbPJP',
  title='Inheritance intuition',
  user='miriamsuzanne',
  height=600
) }}

## There's no good argument for inheritance

Of course,
we could still argue
that `box-sizing` is an outlier,
and should be one of the exceptions.
The argument I've seen
comes from way back when `box-sizing`
was first introduced --
and it was very specific to the transitional period
before `box-sizing` was widely used.

The claim is that
we might still have some legacy components
or third-party widgets on our site
that still rely on a _content-box_ model.
By setting `box-sizing` to `inherit`,
we can change our box model on the widget container,
and it will apply to everything inside.
The assumption is that any component
will be designed using one box model or the other --
so we want to quickly toggle between them
for entire sub-sections of a web page.

And for a time,
that might have been a fair assumption.
But you can handle that case easily
without relying on inheritance:

```css
/* set it everywhere */
* { box-sizing: border-box; }

/* override it in context */
.content-box-sizing, .content-box-sizing * {
  box-sizing: content-box;
}
```

This isn't more difficult than inheritance,
and it's less code by default.
But more important to me,
_that's not the best use of `box-sizing`_.

## Box-sizing is more useful when it doesn't inherit!

Contrary to popular belief,
there's not a _modern_ `border-box` model,
and a _legacy_ `content-box` --
where sites/components can easily divide
between the two.
While the `border-box` model
is clearly a more useful _default_
in modern web design,
there are great reasons to use
`content-box` sizing
in modern layouts!

This may seem to obvious,
but the `content-box` model is useful
_when we care about the size of the content_.
I find that most useful for wrapping containers.
When I'm setting a good line-length for text content,
I don't actually care about the outer max-width of the `border-box`,
I care about the line-length available in the `content-box`.
Borders and padding should be additional,
rather than eating into the content.

I find this is often true with generated
`::before` and `::after` content as well --
which is why I don't generally change the default
on pseudo-elements.
I can handle it case-by-case, when needed.

The code-smell for switching box models
is any time we need a sizing calculation
that adds or removes the borders and padding:

```css
/* use content-box instead! */
.container {
  padding: var(--padding);
  width: calc(var(--line-length) + (var(--padding) * 2));
}

/* much better */
.container {
  box-sizing: content-box;
  padding: var(--padding);
  width: var(--line-length);
}
```

When we're using `box-sizing` in this way --
_the way it was intended!_ --
inheritance would only get in the way.
I specifically want the ability to size containers
_differently_ from the rest of the elements
inside the container.

This may not happen all the time
in your code,
but I'm confident the
legacy-component use-case is _even less common_ --
and even simpler to handle on a case-by-case basis.

Please don't inherit the box model.
It starts you off in the wrong mindset,
just to solve a problem that doesn't really exist.
