content/blog/2025/type-units.md, before:

---
title: The best CSS unit might be a combination
sub: We don't have to choose between `px` and `rem` for spacing
author: miriam
date: 2025-09-23
tags:
  - Article
  - CSS
  - Typography
series: revisiting fluid typography
related_tag: Typography
image:
  src: blog/2025/capital-letters.jpg
  alt: >
    Close-up of keys on an old Spanish typewriter,
    part of the space bar,
    a, s, d, z, x,
    and MAYÚSCULAS (capslock)
    with release above it
summary: |
  There are many articles
  and established CSS best-practices
  that rely on determining
  the *correct* or *best* units to use.
  Now that comparison functions
  are well supported in CSS,
  we don't have to choose.
---

One thing I want to highlight
from the last several posts in this series
is that my solutions often involve
combining and comparing units.

In the post on [user font-size preferences](/2025/07/22/size-preferences/),
I pointed out that `em`-based root font-sizes
_multiply_ the user setting.
If we ask for a `20px` font-size
by calling it `1.25em`,
and then the user also asks for a `20px` font-size,
the result will not be agreement
but a combined `25px` font.
If we switch to a `px`-only approach,
we're ignoring the user preference entirely --
which is even worse.
But if we stop doing the math in our heads,
and provide the browser with both units,
we can do a much more interesting
and useful comparison:

```css
html {
  /* use the larger of the two */
  font-size: max(1em, 20px);

  /* clamp within a range near the user setting */
  font-size: clamp(1em, 20px, 1.25em);

  /* calculate the average */
  font-size: calc((1em + 24px) / 2);
}
```

In all three cases,
there's no conversion required.
We state clearly the `px` font-size we're aiming for,
and then compare it against the user-provided `em`.
The units have different meanings,
and those meanings are useful
for expressing more clearly
the negotiation between site and user font sizes.

I like to think of relative CSS units
as browser-provided variables,
allowing us to pass in a multiplier.
We could write it out long-hand, if we had to:

```css
html {
  font-size: clamp(var(--user-font-size), 20px, 1.25 * var(--user-font-size));
}
```

Thinking about units that way
reminds me to think about the _meaning_
rather than the _assumed px value_ of the unit.

## Use the unit that means what you mean

Once I've handled that user-preference negotiation
on the root element,
I can refer to the result of that elsewhere
as `1rem`.
In my mind `1rem` is a always a calculation
with a variable in it:
`calc(1 * var(--negotiated-base-font-size))`.
Similarly `1em` can be thought of as
`calc(1 * var(--current-font-size))`.

The difference between `1rem` and `1em`
is like the difference between `--brand-pink`
and `currentColor`.
Both are variables, both are useful,
but they describe entirely different relationships.
To ask which one is _better_ in general
is an absurd question.

If I want to develop
[fluid type calculations](/2025/08/26/type-visual/)
that adapt to local context,
I'll use `em` and `cqi` (container inline size) values.
If I want my calculations to remain consistent
across the entire page,
I'll use `rem` and `vi` (viewport inline size) calculations.
In either case,
I'll define those values on `body`
or other elements --
so that `1rem` always refers to the
result of our initial negotiation,
and doesn't take on more complex meaning.

## How I handle spacing in CSS

It's taken me a while to get here,
but this entire series was set in motion
by a great Ashlee Boyer article about
[using `px` for spacing](https://ashleemboyer.com/blog/why-you-should-use-px-units-for-margin-padding-and-other-spacing-techniques).
Her point is that users zooming in
care mostly about zooming the _content_ --
and it can make things less readable
if we always zoom the spacing
at the same rate as the text (using `em` or `rem`).
We end up with excessive white-space
that pushes our content off-screen.

I think she's pointing to a worthwhile concern,
but I came to a slightly different conclusion.
We don't have to choose between `px` and `em`/`rem`
as our only sizing options here!
We can again
describe for the browser
how we think about white space
in more detail --
accounting for _both_ font-size
and available space.

I actually use several different
'spacing' units in my work.
My favorite is the `lh` (line height) value.
When I'm putting space between paragraphs
or list-items in a flow of text,
I want to maintain a consistent rhythm --
so `1lh` is the default,
and I can use multiples like
`0.5lh` or `3lh` when I need some variation.
If I need this to be consistent across the page,
I can use `rlh` values instead.

But if I want to space things
on the inline axis, add gaps in a grid,
or put padding around a card,
I might also want to account
for the _available space_.
So now I'm negotiating two different concerns,
and I can represent each with a different unit --
using comparison and math functions
to get a final value.
Maybe one of these:

```css
.card {
  /* use 1lh, unless we run out of space */
  --min: min(1lh, 2vi);

  /* round-up to the nearest half-line */
  --nearest-half: round(up, 2vi, 0.5lh);
}
```

If we know we want exactly `12px` for spacing,
then absolutely --
just say `12px`!
There's no reason for unnecessary conversions.
But if we want to be responsive
to font-size _and_ available space,
we can do that instead.
We could even clamp our responsive values
within a range of font sizes.

The right units
for any situation
are _the ones that express most clearly
what we mean_ --
and sometimes what we mean
requires a combination of units.

This is the central premise of
the OddBird approach to
what we call
[Poetic CSS Architecture](/services/architecture/).
There's no best unit,
no best layout mode,
and no best selector.
When we use the entire language,
we have more tools for clearly expressing our goals.

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

{% callout 'note', false %}
If you enjoy Miriam's writing
on modern CSS,
consider booking her
[Cascading Layouts Workshop](/workshops/cascading-layouts/)
at your company
to take your sites
and your team's skills
to the next level.

[Book a workshop for your company »](/workshops/cascading-layouts/#schedule-a-workshop)
{% endcallout %}

Commit message:

Add hero image for units post

content/blog/2025/type-units.md, after:

---
title: The best CSS unit might be a combination
sub: We don't have to choose between `px` and `rem` for spacing
author: miriam
date: 2025-09-23
tags:
  - Article
  - CSS
  - Typography
series: revisiting fluid typography
related_tag: Typography
image:
  src: blog/2025/units.jpg
  alt: >
    A measuring tape with both imperial and metric,
    then a ruler with only metric,
    and another ruler with combined units
summary: |
  There are many articles
  and established CSS best-practices
  that rely on determining
  the *correct* or *best* units to use.
  Now that comparison functions
  are well supported in CSS,
  we don't have to choose.
---

One thing I want to highlight
from the last several posts in this series
is that my solutions often involve
combining and comparing units.

In the post on [user font-size preferences](/2025/07/22/size-preferences/),
I pointed out that `em`-based root font-sizes
_multiply_ the user setting.
If we ask for a `20px` font-size
by calling it `1.25em`,
and then the user also asks for a `20px` font-size,
the result will not be agreement
but a combined `25px` font.
If we switch to a `px`-only approach,
we're ignoring the user preference entirely --
which is even worse.
But if we stop doing the math in our heads,
and provide the browser with both units,
we can do a much more interesting
and useful comparison:

```css
html {
  /* use the larger of the two */
  font-size: max(1em, 20px);

  /* clamp within a range near the user setting */
  font-size: clamp(1em, 20px, 1.25em);

  /* calculate the average */
  font-size: calc((1em + 24px) / 2);
}
```

In all three cases,
there's no conversion required.
We state clearly the `px` font-size we're aiming for,
and then compare it against the user-provided `em`.
The units have different meanings,
and those meanings are useful
for expressing more clearly
the negotiation between site and user font sizes.

I like to think of relative CSS units
as browser-provided variables,
allowing us to pass in a multiplier.
We could write it out long-hand, if we had to:

```css
html {
  font-size: clamp(var(--user-font-size), 20px, 1.25 * var(--user-font-size));
}
```

Thinking about units that way
reminds me to think about the _meaning_
rather than the _assumed px value_ of the unit.

## Use the unit that means what you mean

Once I've handled that user-preference negotiation
on the root element,
I can refer to the result of that elsewhere
as `1rem`.
In my mind `1rem` is a always a calculation
with a variable in it:
`calc(1 * var(--negotiated-base-font-size))`.
Similarly `1em` can be thought of as
`calc(1 * var(--current-font-size))`.

The difference between `1rem` and `1em`
is like the difference between `--brand-pink`
and `currentColor`.
Both are variables, both are useful,
but they describe entirely different relationships.
To ask which one is _better_ in general
is an absurd question.

If I want to develop
[fluid type calculations](/2025/08/26/type-visual/)
that adapt to local context,
I'll use `em` and `cqi` (container inline size) values.
If I want my calculations to remain consistent
across the entire page,
I'll use `rem` and `vi` (viewport inline size) calculations.
In either case,
I'll define those values on `body`
or other elements --
so that `1rem` always refers to the
result of our initial negotiation,
and doesn't take on more complex meaning.

## How I handle spacing in CSS

It's taken me a while to get here,
but this entire series was set in motion
by a great Ashlee Boyer article about
[using `px` for spacing](https://ashleemboyer.com/blog/why-you-should-use-px-units-for-margin-padding-and-other-spacing-techniques).
Her point is that users zooming in
care mostly about zooming the _content_ --
and it can make things less readable
if we always zoom the spacing
at the same rate as the text (using `em` or `rem`).
We end up with excessive white-space
that pushes our content off-screen.

I think she's pointing to a worthwhile concern,
but I came to a slightly different conclusion.
We don't have to choose between `px` and `em`/`rem`
as our only sizing options here!
We can again
describe for the browser
how we think about white space
in more detail --
accounting for _both_ font-size
and available space.

I actually use several different
'spacing' units in my work.
My favorite is the `lh` (line height) value.
When I'm putting space between paragraphs
or list-items in a flow of text,
I want to maintain a consistent rhythm --
so `1lh` is the default,
and I can use multiples like
`0.5lh` or `3lh` when I need some variation.
If I need this to be consistent across the page,
I can use `rlh` values instead.

But if I want to space things
on the inline axis, add gaps in a grid,
or put padding around a card,
I might also want to account
for the _available space_.
So now I'm negotiating two different concerns,
and I can represent each with a different unit --
using comparison and math functions
to get a final value.
Maybe one of these:

```css
.card {
  /* use 1lh, unless we run out of space */
  --min: min(1lh, 2vi);

  /* round-up to the nearest half-line */
  --nearest-half: round(up, 2vi, 0.5lh);
}
```

If we know we want exactly `12px` for spacing,
then absolutely --
just say `12px`!
There's no reason for unnecessary conversions.
But if we want to be responsive
to font-size _and_ available space,
we can do that instead.
We could even clamp our responsive values
within a range of font sizes.

The right units
for any situation
are _the ones that express most clearly
what we mean_ --
and sometimes what we mean
requires a combination of units.

This is the central premise of
the OddBird approach to
what we call
[Poetic CSS Architecture](/services/architecture/).
There's no best unit,
no best layout mode,
and no best selector.
When we use the entire language,
we have more tools for clearly expressing our goals.

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

{% callout 'note', false %}
If you enjoy Miriam's writing
on modern CSS,
consider booking her
[Cascading Layouts Workshop](/workshops/cascading-layouts/)
at your company
to take your sites
and your team's skills
to the next level.

[Book a workshop for your company »](/workshops/cascading-layouts/#schedule-a-workshop)
{% endcallout %}
