---
position: open
banner: JavaScript Developer
sub: Leading our front-end development process
date: 2021-03-26
---

OddBird is looking for a **JavaScript Developer** to join the team,
and we'd love to hear from you!

## You:

- Have experience writing JavaScript for the web, preferably not limited to a single framework
- Enjoy solving complex problems with readable, efficient, tested code
- Can explain the decisions behind your work, and the tradeoffs involved
- Work closely with designers to integrate form & function
- Enjoy the push-and-pull of a tight feedback cycle
- Enjoy exploring outside what you know, and questioning your assumptions
- Are based in a timezone from UTC-3 (Puerto Rico) to UTC-8 (Alaska)

## OddBirds:

- Are a small team (you'll be #8)
- Enjoy working collaboratively on complex problems
- Are involved with the vision and direction of the company: how we work, who we work for, and how we manage resources
- Are paid a competitive hourly rate, equally across the entire team
- Write tests (100% coverage everywhere, always) and documentation
- Give and receive code reviews as collaborators
- Have lives & interests outside of work
- Set our own hours, and work from anywhere
- Listen to users, and enjoy having our assumptions challenged/tested
- Care about diversity in the tech community
- Are engaged in the software community – writing articles, sharing tools, and giving talks

This isn't a cubicle job with dental, a 401k, and paid vacation. We're also not a start-up expecting you to work nights and weekends towards future equity. This is a contract job with long term potential, a good hourly rate, and a lot of flexibility. We work together to find clients, and we work together to build them the best tools we can. When there's work to be done, we all do what we can, and we get paid for our time.

We’re looking for 15-20 billable hours per week to start, with potential for more.
Our process keeps design and development tightly integrated. There are no Photoshop comps thrown over the wall to developers. Everyone is working together (with clients and users) towards a unified goal. While we are specifically hiring for JavaScript experience, we’re interested in the full range of your skills and interests.

## Interested?

Let's talk! Tell us about yourself and your work. Contact jobs@oddbird.net to start the conversation.

{{ team | md | safe }}
