content/talks/state-of-design.md, before:

---
title: The Great State of Design
sub: with CSS Grid Layout and Friends
author: stacy
date: 2016-12-03
slides: https://www.slideshare.net/Funstacy/the-great-state-of-design-with-css-grid-layout-and-friends
tags:
  - CSS
  - Grids
  - Design
events:
  - venue: Front-End Camp
    url: http://chicagocamps.org/events/2017/front-end-camp/
    date: 2017-06-03
    adr: Chicago, IL
  - venue: CSSDay.io
    url: http://cssday.io/
    date: 2016-12-03
    adr: Chandler, AZ
    slides: https://www.slideshare.net/Funstacy/the-great-state-of-design-with-css-grid-layout-and-friends
    media:
      iframe: https://www.youtube.com/embed/pnbT4HdcSwM
    post: /2017/1/31/css-day
summary: |
  **For far too long we've been forced to reuse layout patterns** that
  have worked in the past, creating a web full of sites that all look the
  same. Narrow timelines, browser support restrictions and lack of a true
  grid systems have led us to create work that is "good enough".
---

[Stacy] spent years exploring how we can make the web a more unique
space. With some of the newer CSS techniques available, we can start to
make more creative designs. CSS Grid Layout is on the horizon and will
play a major role in the design of our sites. Finally having a true, 2
dimensional grid will give our layouts much more flexibility and it is
on us to explore the possibilities.

[Stacy]: /authors/stacy

Commit message:

added all images to talks

content/talks/state-of-design.md, after:

---
title: The Great State of Design
sub: with CSS Grid Layout and Friends
author: stacy
date: 2016-12-03
image:
  src: talks/great-state.jpg
  alt: repeated grid of the same dog picture in different colors
slides: https://www.slideshare.net/Funstacy/the-great-state-of-design-with-css-grid-layout-and-friends
tags:
  - CSS
  - Grids
  - Design
events:
  - venue: Front-End Camp
    url: http://chicagocamps.org/events/2017/front-end-camp/
    date: 2017-06-03
    adr: Chicago, IL
  - venue: CSSDay.io
    url: http://cssday.io/
    date: 2016-12-03
    adr: Chandler, AZ
    slides: https://www.slideshare.net/Funstacy/the-great-state-of-design-with-css-grid-layout-and-friends
    media:
      iframe: https://www.youtube.com/embed/pnbT4HdcSwM
    post: /2017/1/31/css-day
summary: |
  **For far too long we've been forced to reuse layout patterns** that
  have worked in the past, creating a web full of sites that all look the
  same. Narrow timelines, browser support restrictions and lack of a true
  grid systems have led us to create work that is "good enough".
---

[Stacy] spent years exploring how we can make the web a more unique
space. With some of the newer CSS techniques available, we can start to
make more creative designs. CSS Grid Layout is on the horizon and will
play a major role in the design of our sites. Finally having a true, 2
dimensional grid will give our layouts much more flexibility and it is
on us to explore the possibilities.

[Stacy]: /authors/stacy
