content/workshops/cascading-layouts.md, before:

---
title: Cascading Layouts
sub: A workshop on resilient CSS layouts
author: miriam
action:
  text: Register now for April 2025 »
  url: 'https://ti.to/pland/css-layout'
date: 2025-04-28
image:
  src: talks/cascading-workshop-cat.jpg
  position: center
  alt: |
    A cat sitting in a box
    thinking OMG.
    I have so many questions
    for this damn box.
og:
  img: talks/cascading-layouts-workshop-og.jpg
tags:
  - CSS
  - Cascade
  - Custom Properties
  - Container Queries
  - Layout
  - CSSWG
included:
  - title: Interactive Sessions
    text: Online, wherever you are
    icon: icons/talk
  - title: Dedicated Q&A
    text: To gain a thorough understanding
    icon: icons/messaging
  - title: Cutting Edge Techniques
    text: From a W3C Invited Expert
    icon: icons/rocket
  - title: Certificate of Completion
    text: Documenting your education
    icon: icons/ribbon
  - title: Immediate Access
    text: To recordings and shared notes
    icon: icons/video
events:
  - venue: OddBird Workshops
    adr: Online
    date: 2025-04-28
    end: 2025-04-30
press:
  - text: |
      Miriam is one of the very few people I trust enough to point my own
      students toward. She gets the “why” as much as the “how,” and makes
      learning CSS feel genuinely empowering.
    name: Christine Vallaure
    title: Founder
    venue: moonlearning
    face: christine-vallaure.jpeg
    url: https://www.moonlearning.io/
  - text: |
      There are few, if any, who are more qualified to cover the ins and outs
      of CSS layout, and I can tell you that Miriam's work really helped
      inspire and inform the content in my course.
    name: Geoff Graham
    title: Author
    venue: CSS-Tricks
    face: geoff-graham.jpeg
    url: https://css-tricks.com/cascading-layouts-a-workshop-on-resilient-css-layouts/
callout_content: |
  9am - 11:30am PT

  [Early bird tickets](https://ti.to/pland/css-layout)
  on sale through April 12. For workshop
  updates and demos of workshop content,
  subscribe to [OddNews](/oddnews/).
summary: |
  CSS layout techniques have come a long way
  since the early days of responsive design,
  but many websites are still using
  decade-old approaches
  that require more fragile code
  and more ongoing maintenance.
  **Take your sites to the next level
  with this 3-session workshop
  on building more resilient and maintainable web layouts
  using modern CSS**.
media:
  - youtube: 8k6m87woEpQ
    id: workshop-video
  - youtube: De6QMQA2aio
    id: workshop-video-2
---

{% import 'utility.macros.njk' as utility %}
{% import 'contact.macros.njk' as contact %}
{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}
{% import "quotes.macros.njk" as quotes %}

{{ embed.figure(media) }}

## What Will Attendees Get?

{{ embed.icon_block(
  data=included,
  grid='fit'
) }}

## Register Now for April 2025

<script src="https://js.tito.io/v2" async></script>
<script>
  window.tito = window.tito ||
    function() {
      (tito.q = tito.q || []).push(arguments);
    };
  tito('on:widget:loaded',function(){
     document.getElementById('tito-registration-fallback').setAttribute('hidden', 'hidden');
  });
</script>

<a href="https://ti.to/pland/css-layout" id="tito-registration-fallback">Register</a>
<tito-widget event="pland/css-layout"></tito-widget>

## Discounts & Scholarships

Freelancer and other
need-based scholarships available.
For discounts,
please [contact us].

[contact us]: /contact/

{{ quotes.grid(press) }}

## What Will Attendees Learn In This Workshop?

- Building **maintainable CSS layouts** with **progressive enhancement**
- The built-in power of **normal flow**
- Distributing space with **flexbox** and **alignment**
- Dynamic layouts using **grid** and **subgrid**
- More intrinsic and modular design with **container queries**

## Who Is This For?

This workshop is intended for designers & developers
with at least a basic understanding of HTML and CSS.
You don’t need to be an expert to keep up,
but even the experts are likely to learn something new.

{{ utility.main_action(
  content='Register now »',
  url='https://ti.to/pland/css-layout'
) }}

## About Miriam

{% set miriam = collections.birds | authorPage('miriam') %}
{{ miriam.data.bio | md | safe }}

## Workshop Outline

The workshop is taught in three sessions:

### 1. Declarative Layouts

{{ embed.figure([{
  img: 'pages/css-workshop/cascade.jpg',
  alt: 'Yoda reaching out to control the force, surrounded by jungle swamp'
}]) }}

#### Cascading Styles

CSS is fundamentally different
from other languages or design tools,
built around a radical vision
for contextual style and user-control.
We’ll dig into the practical implications of that vision,
and how the ‘grain’ of the language
can guide us to more performant and resilient styles.

#### Layout Modes & Formatting Contexts

Many CSS properties are _modal_,
behaving differently in different layout contexts.
We'll start from the default layout mode
called 'normal flow' --
a powerful default
that often feels _natural_,
but hides a lot of complexity just below the surface.
We'll look at how the DOM is rendered
as a tree of inline and block boxes,
each generating a new 'formatting context'
for the elements nested inside.

### 2. Distributing Space

{{ embed.figure([{
  img: 'pages/css-workshop/flow.jpg',
  alt: 'Earth seen through a window on the international space station'
}]) }}

#### Flowing & Flexing

Unlike the printed page,
web content and context can be unpredictable.
CSS provides tools to manage that uncertainty,
aligning & distributing objects on the page.
We’ll talk about normal flow,
intrinsic and extrinsic sizing,
logical properties,
box sizing & alignment,
and the flexible box model.

#### Flex & Alignment in Practice

Practical use-cases,
and interactive exercises related to distributing space.

### 3. Defining Structure

{{ embed.figure([{
  img: 'pages/css-workshop/grids.jpg',
  alt: 'Cat in a box, thinking OMG I have so many questions for this damn box'
}]) }}

#### Defining Structure

Sometimes we also need to impose external structure
to create consistent and reliable layouts,
even with unpredictable content.
This is a full session dedicated to grid & subgrid,
the multiple ‘stages of squishiness’,
and container queries.

#### Grids & Containers in Practice

Practical use-cases,
and interactive exercises related to defining layouts.

## Contact Us to Book a Workshop

If your full team can't join us for
the April workshop, consider bringing
us in to talk with your team directly:

{{ contact.form(
  submit='Book Now',
  name='workshop',
  extraActions='or [subscribe to OddNews for updates »](/oddnews/)'
) }}

Commit message:

add two quotes and third demo video

content/workshops/cascading-layouts.md, after:

---
title: Cascading Layouts
sub: A workshop on resilient CSS layouts
author: miriam
action:
  text: Register now for April 2025 »
  url: 'https://ti.to/pland/css-layout'
date: 2025-04-28
image:
  src: talks/cascading-workshop-cat.jpg
  position: center
  alt: |
    A cat sitting in a box
    thinking OMG.
    I have so many questions
    for this damn box.
og:
  img: talks/cascading-layouts-workshop-og.jpg
tags:
  - CSS
  - Cascade
  - Custom Properties
  - Container Queries
  - Layout
  - CSSWG
included:
  - title: Interactive Sessions
    text: Online, wherever you are
    icon: icons/talk
  - title: Dedicated Q&A
    text: To gain a thorough understanding
    icon: icons/messaging
  - title: Cutting Edge Techniques
    text: From a W3C Invited Expert
    icon: icons/rocket
  - title: Certificate of Completion
    text: Documenting your education
    icon: icons/ribbon
  - title: Immediate Access
    text: To recordings and shared notes
    icon: icons/video
events:
  - venue: OddBird Workshops
    adr: Online
    date: 2025-04-28
    end: 2025-04-30
press:
  - text: |
      Miriam is one of the very few people I trust enough to point my own
      students toward. She gets the “why” as much as the “how,” and makes
      learning CSS feel genuinely empowering.
    name: Christine Vallaure
    title: Founder
    venue: moonlearning
    face: christine-vallaure.jpeg
    url: https://www.moonlearning.io/
  - text: |
      There are few, if any, who are more qualified to cover the ins and outs
      of CSS layout, and I can tell you that Miriam's work really helped
      inspire and inform the content in my course.
    name: Geoff Graham
    title: Author
    venue: CSS-Tricks
    face: geoff-graham.jpeg
    url: https://css-tricks.com/cascading-layouts-a-workshop-on-resilient-css-layouts/
  - text: |
      I'm not sure I know anyone
      who understands CSS layouts better than Miriam,
      but her real skill is being able to explain it all
      in easy to understand ways.
    name: Kevin Powell
    title: Educator and CSS Evangelist
    venue: Kevin Powell YouTube
    face: kevin-powell.jpg
    url: https://www.youtube.com/kevinpowell
  - text: |
      She doesn’t just teach how things work,
      she explains why they work that way,
      and how everything fits together.
      It was a treat to learn
      from someone involved in writing the specs.
    name: Charis Rooda
    title: Front-end Developer
    venue: Charismagic
    face: charis-rooda.png
    url: http://charismagic.studio/
callout_content: |
  9am - 11:30am PT

  [Early bird tickets](https://ti.to/pland/css-layout)
  on sale through April 12. For workshop
  updates and demos of workshop content,
  subscribe to [OddNews](/oddnews/).
summary: |
  CSS layout techniques have come a long way
  since the early days of responsive design,
  but many websites are still using
  decade-old approaches
  that require more fragile code
  and more ongoing maintenance.
  **Take your sites to the next level
  with this 3-session workshop
  on building more resilient and maintainable web layouts
  using modern CSS**.
media:
  - youtube: 8k6m87woEpQ
    id: workshop-video
  - youtube: De6QMQA2aio
    id: workshop-video-2
  - youtube: ccL4JP4f_R4
    id: workshop-video-3
---

{% import 'utility.macros.njk' as utility %}
{% import 'contact.macros.njk' as contact %}
{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}
{% import "quotes.macros.njk" as quotes %}

{{ embed.figure(media) }}

## What Will Attendees Get?

{{ embed.icon_block(
  data=included,
  grid='fit'
) }}

## Register Now for April 2025

<script src="https://js.tito.io/v2" async></script>
<script>
  window.tito = window.tito ||
    function() {
      (tito.q = tito.q || []).push(arguments);
    };
  tito('on:widget:loaded',function(){
     document.getElementById('tito-registration-fallback').setAttribute('hidden', 'hidden');
  });
</script>

<a href="https://ti.to/pland/css-layout" id="tito-registration-fallback">Register</a>
<tito-widget event="pland/css-layout"></tito-widget>

## Discounts & Scholarships

Freelancer and other
need-based scholarships available.
For discounts,
please [contact us].

[contact us]: /contact/

{{ quotes.grid(press) }}

## What Will Attendees Learn In This Workshop?

- Building **maintainable CSS layouts** with **progressive enhancement**
- The built-in power of **normal flow**
- Distributing space with **flexbox** and **alignment**
- Dynamic layouts using **grid** and **subgrid**
- More intrinsic and modular design with **container queries**

## Who Is This For?

This workshop is intended for designers & developers
with at least a basic understanding of HTML and CSS.
You don’t need to be an expert to keep up,
but even the experts are likely to learn something new.

{{ utility.main_action(
  content='Register now »',
  url='https://ti.to/pland/css-layout'
) }}

## About Miriam

{% set miriam = collections.birds | authorPage('miriam') %}
{{ miriam.data.bio | md | safe }}

## Workshop Outline

The workshop is taught in three sessions:

### 1. Declarative Layouts

{{ embed.figure([{
  img: 'pages/css-workshop/cascade.jpg',
  alt: 'Yoda reaching out to control the force, surrounded by jungle swamp'
}]) }}

#### Cascading Styles

CSS is fundamentally different
from other languages or design tools,
built around a radical vision
for contextual style and user-control.
We’ll dig into the practical implications of that vision,
and how the ‘grain’ of the language
can guide us to more performant and resilient styles.

#### Layout Modes & Formatting Contexts

Many CSS properties are _modal_,
behaving differently in different layout contexts.
We'll start from the default layout mode
called 'normal flow' --
a powerful default
that often feels _natural_,
but hides a lot of complexity just below the surface.
We'll look at how the DOM is rendered
as a tree of inline and block boxes,
each generating a new 'formatting context'
for the elements nested inside.

### 2. Distributing Space

{{ embed.figure([{
  img: 'pages/css-workshop/flow.jpg',
  alt: 'Earth seen through a window on the international space station'
}]) }}

#### Flowing & Flexing

Unlike the printed page,
web content and context can be unpredictable.
CSS provides tools to manage that uncertainty,
aligning & distributing objects on the page.
We’ll talk about normal flow,
intrinsic and extrinsic sizing,
logical properties,
box sizing & alignment,
and the flexible box model.

#### Flex & Alignment in Practice

Practical use-cases,
and interactive exercises related to distributing space.

### 3. Defining Structure

{{ embed.figure([{
  img: 'pages/css-workshop/grids.jpg',
  alt: 'Cat in a box, thinking OMG I have so many questions for this damn box'
}]) }}

#### Defining Structure

Sometimes we also need to impose external structure
to create consistent and reliable layouts,
even with unpredictable content.
This is a full session dedicated to grid & subgrid,
the multiple ‘stages of squishiness’,
and container queries.

#### Grids & Containers in Practice

Practical use-cases,
and interactive exercises related to defining layouts.

## Contact Us to Book a Workshop

If your full team can't join us for
the April workshop, consider bringing
us in to talk with your team directly:

{{ contact.form(
  submit='Book Now',
  name='workshop',
  extraActions='or [subscribe to OddNews for updates »](/oddnews/)'
) }}
