content/blog/elsewhere/sitepoint/sitepoint.md, before:

---
title: Live Q&A with Miriam
author: miriam
date: 2016-10-11
tags:
  - _post
  - Q&A
  - Interview
  - SitePoint
canonical: https://www.sitepoint.com/community/t/live-q-a-miriam-suzanne-on-susy-and-the-need-for-toolkits-on-18th-aug-2pm-pst/232664
venue: SitePoint
image:
  src: blog/2016/QandA.jpg
summary: |
  I did a [live Q&A at SitePoint][qa] back in August. We talked about
  customizing Susy for your needs, why you might not need a grid system,
  other tools I'm working on, and how to select or build your own
  toolkits.

  It was a wild two-hours of typing as fast as I could, and hoping to
  sound intelligent. Thanks for asking the questions!

  [qa]: https://www.sitepoint.com/community/t/live-q-a-miriam-suzanne-on-susy-and-the-need-for-toolkits-on-18th-aug-2pm-pst/232664
---

I did a [live Q&A at SitePoint] back in August. We talked about
customizing Susy for your needs, why you might not need a grid system,
other tools I'm working on, and how to select or build your own
toolkits.

It was a wild two-hours of typing as fast as I could, and hoping to
sound intelligent. Thanks for asking the questions!

> To be clear: now that we have border-box sizing, grid math can be much
> simpler. Complex math is only required if you are using margin-based
> gutters. Move your gutters into padding, and the math is simple.
> That's why I don't use Susy (or any grid system) much any more.
> `percentage(1/5)` works great in Sass -and flexbox takes care of the
> rest.
>
> ---[Miriam Suzanne][live Q&A at SitePoint]

You can also check out the [summary] – but it leaves out some good bits.

[live Q&A at SitePoint]: https://www.sitepoint.com/community/t/live-q-a-miriam-suzanne-on-susy-and-the-need-for-toolkits-on-18th-aug-2pm-pst/232664
[summary]: https://www.sitepoint.com/how-to-choose-the-right-css-toolkits-and-frameworks/

Commit message:

Organize data with yaml/deep-merge features

content/blog/elsewhere/sitepoint/sitepoint.md, after:

---
title: Sass Toolkits, Live Q&A
date: 2016-10-11
tags:
  - Q&A
  - Interview
  - Susy
url: https://www.sitepoint.com/how-to-choose-the-right-css-toolkits-and-frameworks/
image:
  src: blog/2016/QandA.jpg
summary: |
  I did a [live Q&A at SitePoint][qa] in August,
  talking about:

  - Customizing Susy for your projects
  - Other ways to do layouts (and why you might not even need a toolkit)
  - How to select a toolkit, or build your very own!

  [qa]: https://www.sitepoint.com/community/t/live-q-a-miriam-suzanne-on-susy-and-the-need-for-toolkits-on-18th-aug-2pm-pst/232664
---

> To be clear:
> now that we have border-box sizing,
> grid math can be much simpler.
> Complex math is only required
> if you are using margin-based gutters.
> Move your gutters into padding,
> and the math is simple.
> That's why I don't use Susy
> (or any grid system)
> much any more.
> `percentage(1/5)` works great in Sass -
> and flexbox takes care of the rest.

You can read
[a summary of the conversation][summary]
as well —
but it leaves out some good bits. ;)

[summary]: https://www.sitepoint.com/how-to-choose-the-right-css-toolkits-and-frameworks/
