content/blog/2021/containerqueries.md, before:

---
title: Getting Started with Container Queries
sub: Now is the time to begin experimenting with a long requested layout tool. 
author: davidh
date: 2021-04-02
image:
  src: blog/2021/widequote.jpg
  alt: blockquote with magenta background and polygonal clip-path
tags:
  - CSS
  - CSSWG
  - Article
  - Container Queries
summary: |
  The `@container` query, that elusive feature developers have been requesting and proposing for years, has finally made its debut in browsers. Well, sort of. What are **container queries** exactly and how do they work?
---

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

In the latest version of [Chrome Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary), the most recent `@container` query proprosal is available for use behind an experimental flag. Developed by OddBird's own [Miriam Suzanne](https://www.oddbird.net/authors/miriam/), the [draft](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5796) builds upon the ideas previously proposed by other web standards experts like David Baron, who wrote the [original draft](https://github.com/dbaron/container-queries-implementability). 


 ## Background

`@Media` queries sparked a responsive design revolution by allowing authors to change the style of elements based on the size of the entire viewport. Up until now, what could not be done was changing the style of an element based on the size of its parent element. 

## Syntax and an example

 The proposed `@container` query syntax feels a lot like writing a `@media` query, but a main difference is that a `@container` query has to be implemented in two parts.

In this demo (which only works in the latest version of [Chrome Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary)), a `blockquote` is styled differently depending on the size of its container. 

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='YzpywrZ',
  title='Container Queries with Block Quotes',
  user='dvdherron',
  height=600
) }}

### Define a containment context

To achieve this, first define a containment context. This lets the browser know which container to query against later and how exactly to query that specific container. 

```scss
article,
section {
  contain: layout size;
}
```

The `contain` property is part of the existing [CSS Containment Module](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/). The `layout` value activates [layout contaiment](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/#valdef-contain-layout) on the container, which ensures that "nothing outside can affect its internal layout, and vice versa." `Size` also [currently exists](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/#size-containment) as a value for the `contain` property, and enables laying out a containment box without accounting for its descendents in either the inline or block axes. 

```scss
article,
section {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}
```

With `inline-size`, a proposed change to the Containment Module, authors can be more specific when declaring in which dimension containment should be applied. (`Block-size` is also being considered as a containment type in the new proposal. `Inline-size` seemed to satisfy more use-cases, so is being developed first.)

### Apply @-rules at desired breakpoints
Now that a containment context has been defined, the `@container` rule is used to tell the browser when and how styles should change inside each container. 

With a narrow parent container, the `blockquote` features the image stacked on top of the text. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/narrowquote.png',
         alt: 'profile image on top of quote'}],
  caption='The profile image sits on top of the quote in narrow containers.'
) }}

At the first breakpoint, the layout for the `blockquote` changes so that the profile image moves from being above the quote to sitting next to it, and the text describing the speaker gets a heavier weight applied. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/break1.jpg',
         alt: 'profile image next to quote'}],
  caption='The profile image changes position at the first breakpoint to sit next to the quote.'
) }}

```scss
/* change styles according to container size */
@container (min-width: 35em) {

  .quote {
    grid-gap: 1rem;
    grid-template: "media quote" auto/ max-content 1fr;
  }

  .media {
    align-items: center;
  }

  .source {
    font-weight: bold;
  }
}
```

At the second breakpoint, the text for the quote and the attribution gets bigger, the background changes color, and the overall shape of the `blockquote` changes by way of a `clip-path`. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/break2.jpg',
          alt: 'blockquote with magenta background and clip-path'}],
  caption='At a wider breakpoint, the blockquote gets a 
  clip-path and a different background color.'
) }}

```scss
@container (min-width: 60em) {

  .quote {
    --quote-size: 1.5rem;
    --quote-background: darkmagenta;
    clip-path: polygon(
      -0.04% 100.6%,
      1.12% -0.52%,
      95.65% 11.18%,
      96.46% 90.05%
    );
    padding: 1.25em 3em;
    max-width: unset;
  }

  .source {
    font-size: 1.1rem;
  }
}
```

Any styles inside of one of these `@container` blocks will be applied when the container fulfills the condition of the query. 

Just as with `@media` queries, authors can write as many `@container` queries as needed.

## All together now

With each `blockquote` sitting in a different sized container, they all look slightly different, at the same viewport size. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/allquotes.png',
          alt: 'three blockquotes, styled differently'}],
  caption='The same blockquote component gets styled differently depending on its container size.'
) }}


## What's next?

It's still very early in the proposal process, so a lot regarding how container queries work could change. 

- There might be a way to contain only the block axis. 
- Queries could also be made against properties like `aspect-ratio`, `orientation,` or even [custom properties and layout states](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5989).
- We already have viewport-relative units like `vh` and `vw`. Container-relative units could be on the horizon as well. 

Bookmark Miriam's scratch site for updates: [Miriam's CSS Sandbox](https://css.oddbird.net/rwd/query/). 

## Experiment and share

Follow these steps to get started experimenting and making your own demos:
- Download [Chrome Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary) or update to the latest version. 
- Navigate to `chrome://flags`.
- Search for "CSS container queries" and select `Enabled`.
- Restart the browser.

The OddBird team would love to see what you come up with. Tag us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/OddBird) with a link to whatever you create. In the meantime, check out our collection of demos on [CodePen](https://codepen.io/collection/XQrgJo?grid_type=grid&sort_by=item_created_at&sort_order=desc) for inspiration.

Commit message:

add link to open issues board

content/blog/2021/containerqueries.md, after:

---
title: Getting Started with Container Queries
sub: Now is the time to begin experimenting with a long requested layout tool. 
author: davidh
date: 2021-04-02
image:
  src: blog/2021/widequote.jpg
  alt: blockquote with magenta background and polygonal clip-path
tags:
  - CSS
  - CSSWG
  - Article
  - Container Queries
summary: |
  The `@container` query, that elusive feature developers have been requesting and proposing for years, has finally made its debut in browsers. Well, sort of. What are **container queries** exactly and how do they work?
---

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

In the latest version of [Chrome Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary), the most recent `@container` query proprosal is available for use behind an experimental flag. Developed by OddBird's own [Miriam Suzanne](https://www.oddbird.net/authors/miriam/), the [draft](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5796) builds upon the ideas previously proposed by other web standards experts like David Baron, who wrote the [original draft](https://github.com/dbaron/container-queries-implementability). 


 ## Background

`@Media` queries sparked a responsive design revolution by allowing authors to change the style of elements based on the size of the entire viewport. Up until now, what could not be done was changing the style of an element based on the size of its parent element. 

## Syntax and an example

 The proposed `@container` query syntax feels a lot like writing a `@media` query, but a main difference is that a `@container` query has to be implemented in two parts.

In this demo (which only works in the latest version of [Chrome Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary)), a `blockquote` is styled differently depending on the size of its container. 

{{ embed.codepen(
  id='YzpywrZ',
  title='Container Queries with Block Quotes',
  user='dvdherron',
  height=600
) }}

### Define a containment context

To achieve this, first define a containment context. This lets the browser know which container to query against later and how exactly to query that specific container. 

```scss
article,
section {
  contain: layout size;
}
```

The `contain` property is part of the existing [CSS Containment Module](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/). The `layout` value activates [layout contaiment](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/#valdef-contain-layout) on the container, which ensures that "nothing outside can affect its internal layout, and vice versa." `Size` also [currently exists](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/#size-containment) as a value for the `contain` property, and enables laying out a containment box without accounting for its descendents in either the inline or block axes. 

```scss
article,
section {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}
```

With `inline-size`, a proposed change to the Containment Module, authors can be more specific when declaring in which dimension containment should be applied. (`Block-size` is also being considered as a containment type in the new proposal. `Inline-size` seemed to satisfy more use-cases, so is being developed first.)

### Apply @-rules at desired breakpoints
Now that a containment context has been defined, the `@container` rule is used to tell the browser when and how styles should change inside each container. 

With a narrow parent container, the `blockquote` features the image stacked on top of the text. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/narrowquote.png',
         alt: 'profile image on top of quote'}],
  caption='The profile image sits on top of the quote in narrow containers.'
) }}

At the first breakpoint, the layout for the `blockquote` changes so that the profile image moves from being above the quote to sitting next to it, and the text describing the speaker gets a heavier weight applied. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/break1.jpg',
         alt: 'profile image next to quote'}],
  caption='The profile image changes position at the first breakpoint to sit next to the quote.'
) }}

```scss
/* change styles according to container size */
@container (min-width: 35em) {

  .quote {
    grid-gap: 1rem;
    grid-template: "media quote" auto/ max-content 1fr;
  }

  .media {
    align-items: center;
  }

  .source {
    font-weight: bold;
  }
}
```

At the second breakpoint, the text for the quote and the attribution gets bigger, the background changes color, and the overall shape of the `blockquote` changes by way of a `clip-path`. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/break2.jpg',
          alt: 'blockquote with magenta background and clip-path'}],
  caption='At a wider breakpoint, the blockquote gets a 
  clip-path and a different background color.'
) }}

```scss
@container (min-width: 60em) {

  .quote {
    --quote-size: 1.5rem;
    --quote-background: darkmagenta;
    clip-path: polygon(
      -0.04% 100.6%,
      1.12% -0.52%,
      95.65% 11.18%,
      96.46% 90.05%
    );
    padding: 1.25em 3em;
    max-width: unset;
  }

  .source {
    font-size: 1.1rem;
  }
}
```

Any styles inside of one of these `@container` blocks will be applied when the container fulfills the condition of the query. 

Just as with `@media` queries, authors can write as many `@container` queries as needed.

## All together now

With each `blockquote` sitting in a different sized container, they all look slightly different, at the same viewport size. 

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{'img': 'blog/2021/allquotes.png',
          alt: 'three blockquotes, styled differently'}],
  caption='The same blockquote component gets styled differently depending on its container size.'
) }}


## What's next?

It's still very early in the proposal process, so a lot regarding how container queries work could change. 

- There might be a way to contain only the block axis. 
- Queries could also be made against properties like `aspect-ratio`, `orientation,` or even [custom properties and layout states](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5989).
- We already have viewport-relative units like `vh` and `vw`. Container-relative units could be on the horizon as well. 

Bookmark Miriam's scratch site for updates: [Miriam's CSS Sandbox](https://css.oddbird.net/rwd/query/). 
To follow along more directly with the discussions and implementation questions around container queries, stay tuned to this project board: [Open Issues & Work on the Contain 3 Spec](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/projects/18).

## Experiment and share

Follow these steps to get started experimenting and making your own demos:
- Download [Chrome Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary) or update to the latest version. 
- Navigate to `chrome://flags`.
- Search for "CSS container queries" and select `Enabled`.
- Restart the browser.

The OddBird team would love to see what you come up with. Tag us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/OddBird) with a link to whatever you create. In the meantime, check out our collection of demos on [CodePen](https://codepen.io/collection/XQrgJo?grid_type=grid&sort_by=item_created_at&sort_order=desc) for inspiration.
