content/blog/wingingit/winging-it-10.md, before:

---
title: Learn CSS Grid First
episode: 10
tags:
  - CSS
  - Grids
  - Layout
author:
  - miriam
  - stacy
date: 2024-07-23
length: 54 mins
image:
  src: winging-it/winging-it-10.jpg
media:
  - youtube: aDMWD_CYpEI
summary: |
  We talk with Stephanie Eckles
  -- the brain behind [ModernCSS.dev](https://moderncss.dev/) and [SmolCSS.dev](https://smolcss.dev/)
  -- about CSS grids.
  We look at a few of the most common grid patterns,
  to show you how (and why)
  you can get started
  working grids into your CSS toolkit!
---

{% import "embed.macros.njk" as embed %}
{% import "utility.macros.njk" as utility %}

{{ embed.figure(
  data=media
) }}

{{ utility.main_action(
  'Subscribe to Channel »',
  subscribe_url
) }}

## What we cover:
- Is flexbox alone good enough?
- When do you use grid vs flexbox?
- [CSS Grid Terminology](https://codepen.io/stacy/pen/ObmjeZ)

### Different grid techniques:
- Implicit grid to add spacing and alignment
- Auto-repeating grids for gallery layouts
- `auto-fit` vs. `auto-fill`
- Grid areas for overlapping content
- Named lines
- `minmax()`
- Single-area grids vs. absolute positioning

## Links:
- [CSS Grid Areas](https://ishadeed.com/article/css-grid-area/)
- [3 CSS Grid Techniques to Make You a Grid Convert](https://moderncss.dev/3-css-grid-techniques-to-make-you-a-grid-convert/)
- [CSS Grid Experiments](https://codepen.io/collection/DQvYpQ) by Olivia Ng

## Demos:
- [Quick Layout with CSS Grid](https://codepen.io/miriamsuzanne/pen/OJGVzbK)
- [Mix and match functions/intrinsic sizes for all the squish](https://codepen.io/miriamsuzanne/pen/wvKErbK)
- [Subgrid Use Case](https://codepen.io/miriamsuzanne/pen/jRdgLB)

## Learn more about CSS grid:
- [Cascading Style Systems: Resilient & Maintainable CSS](https://smashingconf.com/online-workshops/workshops/modern-css-miriam-suzanne)

Commit message:

add winging it 12 as post and link between episodes 10 and 12

content/blog/wingingit/winging-it-10.md, after:

---
title: Learn CSS Grid First
episode: 10
tags:
  - CSS
  - Grids
  - Layout
author:
  - miriam
  - stacy
date: 2024-07-23
length: 54 mins
image:
  src: winging-it/winging-it-10.jpg
media:
  - youtube: aDMWD_CYpEI
summary: |
  We talk with Stephanie Eckles
  -- the brain behind [ModernCSS.dev](https://moderncss.dev/) and [SmolCSS.dev](https://smolcss.dev/)
  -- about CSS grids.
  We look at a few of the most common grid patterns,
  to show you how (and why)
  you can get started
  working grids into your CSS toolkit!
---

1. Winging It Ep 10: Learn CSS Grid First (this episode)
2. [Winging It Ep 12: Learn CSS Grid - Part 2](/2024/09/17/winging-it-12/)



{% import "embed.macros.njk" as embed %}
{% import "utility.macros.njk" as utility %}

{{ embed.figure(
  data=media
) }}

{{ utility.main_action(
  'Subscribe to Channel »',
  subscribe_url
) }}


## What we cover:
- Is flexbox alone good enough?
- When do you use grid vs flexbox?
- [CSS Grid Terminology](https://codepen.io/stacy/pen/ObmjeZ)

### Different grid techniques:
- Implicit grid to add spacing and alignment
- Auto-repeating grids for gallery layouts
- `auto-fit` vs. `auto-fill`
- Grid areas for overlapping content
- Named lines
- `minmax()`
- Single-area grids vs. absolute positioning

## Links:
- [CSS Grid Areas](https://ishadeed.com/article/css-grid-area/)
- [3 CSS Grid Techniques to Make You a Grid Convert](https://moderncss.dev/3-css-grid-techniques-to-make-you-a-grid-convert/)
- [CSS Grid Experiments](https://codepen.io/collection/DQvYpQ) by Olivia Ng

## Demos:
- [Quick Layout with CSS Grid](https://codepen.io/miriamsuzanne/pen/OJGVzbK)
- [Mix and match functions/intrinsic sizes for all the squish](https://codepen.io/miriamsuzanne/pen/wvKErbK)
- [Subgrid Use Case](https://codepen.io/miriamsuzanne/pen/jRdgLB)

## Learn more about CSS grid:
- [Cascading Style Systems: Resilient & Maintainable CSS](https://smashingconf.com/online-workshops/workshops/modern-css-miriam-suzanne)
