content/blog/wingingit/winging-it-14.md, before:

---
title: CSS IS AWESOME Game
episode: 14
tags:
  - CSS
author:
  - miriam
  - stacy
date: 2024-12-17
length: 90 mins
image:
  src: winging-it/winging-it-14.jpg
media:
  - youtube: fYfs6sKGciQ
summary: |
  On December 17, 1996,
  the W3C published the first standard for CSS,
  and we celebrated the anniversary on Winging It!
  [Michelle Barker](https://michellebarker.co.uk/),
  [Stephanie Eckles](https://thinkdobecreate.com/),
  [Kevin Powell](https://www.kevinpowell.co/),
  and [Henri Helvetica](https://bsky.app/profile/henrihelvetica.bsky.social)
  joined us for our "CSS Is Awesome" game.
  If you love CSS as much as we do,
  we hope you will play along
  as we battle it out
  to see who is AWESOME.
---

{% import "embed.macros.njk" as embed %}
{% import "utility.macros.njk" as utility %}

{{ embed.figure(
  data=media
) }}

{{ utility.main_action(
  'Subscribe to Channel »',
  subscribe_url
) }}

## Games we play:

- 7-Point Polygon
- Password Reset
- Jeoparty

## Example questions:

- What is the unit for quarter-millimeters?
- This function lets you perform calculations when specifying CSS property
  values
- Name 7 `<filter-function>` values
- #A47864 is the hex code for this color, which is Pantone's color of the year

## Links:

- [Sorted Colors](https://enes.in/sorted-colors/)
- [Color Equivalents Table](https://meyerweb.com/eric/css/colors/)

Commit message:

add winging it with Kilian

content/blog/wingingit/winging-it-14.md, after:

---
title: CSS IS AWESOME Game
sub: With special guests Michelle Barker, Stephanie Eckles, Kevin Powell, and Henri Helvetical
episode: 14
tags:
  - CSS
author:
  - miriam
  - stacy
date: 2024-12-17
length: 90 mins
image:
  src: winging-it/winging-it-14.jpg
media:
  - youtube: fYfs6sKGciQ
summary: |
  On December 17, 1996,
  the W3C published the first standard for CSS,
  and we celebrated the anniversary on Winging It!
  [Michelle Barker](https://michellebarker.co.uk/),
  [Stephanie Eckles](https://thinkdobecreate.com/),
  [Kevin Powell](https://www.kevinpowell.co/),
  and [Henri Helvetica](https://bsky.app/profile/henrihelvetica.bsky.social)
  joined us for our "CSS Is Awesome" game.
  If you love CSS as much as we do,
  we hope you will play along
  as we battle it out
  to see who is AWESOME.
---

{% import "embed.macros.njk" as embed %}
{% import "utility.macros.njk" as utility %}

{{ embed.figure(
  data=media
) }}

{{ utility.main_action(
  'Subscribe to Channel »',
  subscribe_url
) }}

## Games we play:

- 7-Point Polygon
- Password Reset
- Jeoparty

## Example questions:

- What is the unit for quarter-millimeters?
- This function lets you perform calculations when specifying CSS property
  values
- Name 7 `<filter-function>` values
- #A47864 is the hex code for this color, which is Pantone's color of the year

## Links:

- [Sorted Colors](https://enes.in/sorted-colors/)
- [Color Equivalents Table](https://meyerweb.com/eric/css/colors/)
